Friends, welcome to Word on Fire Catholic Ministries.
Word on Fire is an apostolate dedicated to the mission of evangelization.
Using media both old and new to share the faith on every continent,
and to facilitate an encounter with Christ and His Church.
The efforts of Word on Fire engage the culture and bring the transformative power of God's Word where it is most needed.
Today, we invite you to join Bishop Robert Barron as he preaches the gospel and shares the warmth and light of Christ with each one of us.
Peace be with you. Friends, we have a great privilege this year because the Feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, September the 14th, falls on a Sunday.
So we have a chance to reflect a bit more deeply on this topic.
Marvelous. Marvelous.
Frankly, disconcerting, odd feast.
Now, how come I say it that way?
Well, let me take you back to this very morning. So I always wake up early. I do my holy hour first thing. And I go to my chapel. In my chapel, I'm
I have a chair and I'm facing the altar in the tabernacle for the holy hour.
And right in the front of the altar, I have this
uh Golden Cross was given me by a friend many years ago and
And it's beautiful. It's kind of the gothic design, very elaborate.
And it's very prayerful. The minute I see that cross, I kind of move into a prayerful frame of mind.
But,
Um.
So if you were to strip away something
The decoration, the gold and the siligree and the gothic, you know, trimmings and all that.
And you brought it back to what it essentially is.
A Roman Cross.
You'd see it.
Indeed, it's something terrible.
And something brutal and awful.
And all the poetry of this feast is summed up in the fact that
I've got on that altar that awful thing.
That awful thing
in gold and decoration and and filigree I'm
Weirdly exalting
This horrific thing.
You know, again, if someone came back from the ancient world and they were brought into that chapel and said, here's a place where this man is praying, it's a religious room, and he'd look at that.
And that decoration is saying, well, wait a minute.
That's a cross.
That's where people are.
brutally put to death.
Uh-huh.
And he's praying?
And in front of Vanity's, cover it in gold. It's like, you know, if you had a hangman's scaffold and noose, right?
And it's all covered in gold and flowers around it.
Like you had an electric chair,
But gold and with Gothic designs and...
People will say, well, what's the matter with you?
That's all the
100% weird poetry, everybody, in this feast. You know what came to mind as I thought more about that?
It was a great experience.
show on hbo about twenty years ago called the rome series i think was only two seasons but it was so well done and it.
evoked that time of Julius Caesar and that whole period of Mark Antony, that pivotal moment in Roman history.
Well, one of the, maybe the first episode.
Yeah. You're with Cesar up in Gaul, and he's got his army with him.
And the standard has been stolen by these local soldiers, local barbarians, as the Romans saw them.
And the commander calls in the main character, Varinus, this Roman soldier, and he says, "Varinus, the standard's been captured and Caesar won."
These are Watts of Back.
Yes, sir.
And he says, well, now what do you propose? How are you going to do it? And he said, I'll go to the neighboring villages and I'll crucify the men until I find out
And the commander said, okay, good.
And then the next scene is this man being nailed to a cross and screaming in pain and
And he reveals where the standards are. And then the next scene is Varidis is coming back with the standard.
Now, I bring that up because
I think that captures beautifully.
The attitude of ancient Rome.
You know, when Cesar went into Gaul,
If they estimate there are about 3 million people in Gaul, he killed a million. That's a conservative estimate. There was a genocide of a million people that Caesar killed. He enslaved another
Another million, the remaining million are the foundation for the Roman province of Gaul, which then became, in time, modern-day France. But when Caesar went in, they
And, again,
And he brutalized the people. And yes, he would crucify people right and left. Right.
It was a sign of Roman power. That's how Rome exerted its kind of
ruthless control
over people.
It was meant to terrify. It was state-sponsored.
Terrorism. Terrorism.
It was the way Rome controlled.
And here's the thing I find really interesting.
Yes, indeed, there were people in Rome that thought Caesar was ambitious, and they didn't like that.
They were very sensitive to people, you know, seizing power illegitimately.
So the crossing of the Rubicon and all of that, they were very aware of that. But listen, nobody complained that Caesar killed a million people.
That didn't bother them at all. In fact, they thought that was a side of what a great commander he was, what a great general he was. Nobody in Rome would have said, oh, did you hear he crucified?
Crucified? He crucified all these people, right?
That didn't bother them at all.
Yeah. Like the commander in that series. Well, what's your plan? Well...
I'll crucify him until I find out where the sanders are. Okay, good. Off you go.
But that's what the cross is.
Mint.
A horrific, terrifying
symbol of of tyrannical power.
And so, if you were talking in the ancient world about the exaltation of the cross,
they would think you were out of your mind.
Yeah. I'm afraid of the cross. Yeah, I get that. It's a sign of Rome's control. Yeah, I get that.
But I'm going to exalt it and I'm going to put gold on it.
I'm going to use it as a focus for my prayer.
Okay.
With all that in mind,
We have to remember now how strange was the emergence of Christianity.
The first Christians come forth.
not denying the cross of Jesus. That's how Jesus died.
He died on one of those Roman crosses.
nailed to it mercilessly, left
To the elements.
To to writhe in pain, slowly bleeding to death and asphyxiating.
In most Roman crucifixions, people were just left on the cross for the birds of the air and the animals.
In Jesus' case, because the Sabbath was coming, they took him down.
But that's how that's how he died.
As one more victim of this horrific
Tyranny,
The first Christians
They don't hide it.
And they don't pretend, oh, he died some other way or somehow he avoided it. No, no.
Paul says, I know one thing, right?
Christ in him crucified.
They preach a mashiach of Israel, a messiah, an anointed.
The anointed was to be the king of Israel. Yes, indeed.
And the clearest indication possible that you were not the Mashiach would have been your death at the hands of Israel's enemies.
That was the best sign possible.
But yet they announce him
They announced the crucified Lord.
How do we begin to explain this?
It seems to me, everybody, and I'm speaking here, not enough.
simply as a theologian. I'm trying to speak just as an historian.
How do you explain the emergence of Christianity?
Apart from the resurrection of Jesus from the dead.
Apart from an act that was so staggering
That it conquered and mocked.
Even this most brutal sign
of
Tyranny and power and cruelty and violence
That's how.
Again, I'm speaking as an historian.
How do you explain the emergence
of Christianity. And these
These men going to their deaths proclaiming.
Jesus is Lord.
It's only the resurrection of Jesus from the dead.
Now,
That as we look upon the exalted cross, the
As we look at it in light of the resurrection, what do we see?
Well, we see
A world turned.
Absolutely upside down
Now, let me share something with you. And I get this from Tom Holland, the historian.
So I mentioned how Caesar conquers Gaul and kills a million people.
His ambition bothered Romans, but the genocide of a million people, that didn't bother the Romans. His crucifixion, that didn't bother the Romans.
Why everybody? Why today?
If someone commits a genocide on that scale, we would say he's a moral
Reprobate.
Yeah. We say he's a monster. Indeed, we have examples, sadly, in the recent times of people doing just that. And we say with complete confidence what horrible people there are.
People there, why do we say that?
Not because somehow, oh yeah, everyone's always said that. They didn't.
They didn't always say it.
What happened was,
The resurrection of Jesus from the dead.
Which showed?
God is not on the side
of the tyrants.
And the murderers.
And those who assert themselves through violence.
But rather, God is on the side.
Of the victim.
Of these things
Look now at this second reading for today, which is from one of the great texts in the New Testament. It's from the second chapter of Paul to the Philippians.
Listen.
Christ Jesus
you know, Jesus Christos there.
Yeshua Mashiach, Jesus the Messiah.
See, and all that irony is there now that Jesus died.
The crucified one is the Mashiach.
Christ Jesus, though he was in the form of God,
It did not deem equality with God something to be grasped.
Mind you, who did deem equality with God something to be grasped?
Edom,
That's the original sin.
Yeah. Eating from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Oh, the devil says, you know, he knows if you eat that, you'll be like him. Yeah.
knowing good and evil. Adam, the nature of sin, is to grasp
At divinity. Well, Jesus, who really is God, doesn't deem equality with God a thing to be grasped. Rather, what? Divinity.
He emptied himself.
And took the form of a slave.
Roman society? A slave? Nobody.
At the bottom.
Slave, if you kill the slave, nobody would care. That's your prerogative. You abuse a slave in every possible way. That's your prerogative.
But see.
God
It takes the form of a slave.
Coming in human likeness.
Humble himself
Listen now.
1. Becoming obedient to death.
Even death on a cross.
Everything I've said about the cross now is contained in that little line. And St. Paul, who grew up in that Roman culture, he knew it very well.
Sin is the human tendency to exalt itself, right?
"'How's it answered?' said the man.
By a divine condescension that goes down
We we aggrandize ourselves
God,
Empties himself.
We always try to get to the top of society, whatever that means.
God,
Willingly goes
All the way down,
Into death
Even death on a cross.
Now listen.
Because of this, God
Exalted him.
and bestowed upon him the name above every other name. Here's the resurrection of Jesus from the dead.
But let me just stay for a minute with the dissent.
If if you want to really help a child.
Who's misbehaving?
I mean, you can say from a distance, you know, you're wrong and you can name the problem and you can send a punishment, right?
Is that going to help the kid?
What's going to help the kid is if you you crouch down
And and try to enter as much as possible into that child's world.
And to
We make the child, as it were, from the inside.
You've entered into his world. You've gone down into it.
If you want to fix a car,
You're not going to say, hey, that car isn't working. Well, I can do that from the outside. You want to fix it? You've got to go all the way down into the car, open the hood, go under the car.
Get your hands into it. Only then will you be able to fix it.
So you want to fix the human race, which is dysfunctional.
And which is beautifully expressed in the cross in all of its cruelty and violence.
Right. If you want to fix that, where do you have to go?
You have to go all the way
Down.
He accepted even death.
Death on a cross.
Can you see the cross, everybody, as God's descent?
Into the very thing that is most wrong with us.
It's his descent into our cruelty and hatred and violence.
And then it's a remaking of it from the inside.
Jesus' word of forgiveness from the cross.
It means that God's love is
Is more powerful
Than anything that's in the world.
And therefore,
That cross becomes the beginning of our salvation.
That cross, which was the
low point in Roman society is now
Exalted. Exalted. There's our feast.
the exaltation of the Holy Cross. Now we do indeed put gold on it. We put filigree around it. We do indeed put it in chapels and make it a
and make it a focus of prayer. Because on that cross, God went all the way down to fix from the inside things.
All that's dysfunctional in us.
And that's why we could say with Paul, I know one thing.
Christ in Him crucified.
And God bless you.
Thank you for listening to this week's homily from Bishop Robert Barron.
For more resources from Bishop Barron, please visit wordonfire dot Org.